[Music]
alright here's a pop quiz name three
differences between an airplane and your
car if one of your answers is I don't
fall 10,000 feet when I run out of gas
you and I clearly think alike but really
planes are pretty good at staying up in
the air when an engine goes down so how
do they do it well first off it's
essential to distinguish between an
engine failing and needing to be shut
down that might seem strange at first
you wouldn't turn off your car while
driving after all but there are a lot of
reasons pilots might need to shut the
engines down while still in the air one
of the most common causes is that
something got into the engines air
intake
jet engines work by mixing fuel with air
and igniting it the force of this
explosion is what pushes the plane
through the air the internal combustion
engine in most cars works on basically
the same principle the difference here
is that in a car the explosive force is
contained inside the engine and used to
move the Pistons and gears that spin
your wheels also like your car a jet
engine needs an opening to the front to
maintain a constant flow of air as
anyone who's ever driven through a
sandstorm will happily confirm getting
dirt in your engine doesn't exactly make
it run any smoother in an airplane birds
are among the most significant hazard
when it comes to plugging up the intake
and it's not too good for the birds
either hailstones are bad to ash from
volcanic eruptions and large forest
fires are a less common but no less
serious hazard to aircraft in flight
think of the air intake as the plane's
video game weak spot and you get the
idea the ingestion of foreign objects
can result in the engine becoming
starved of oxygen interrupting the
reaction and causing what's known as a
flame out literally the flame and the
engine going out one somewhat humorous
example of this can be seen in the US
Air Force's a-10 warthog aircraft due to
a design oversight this plane's large
fuselage mounted engines had the habit
of ingesting the smoke produced by its
own fire
this would result in a flameout and a
very unhappy pilot well this problem was
eventually fixed it shows that a bit of
smoke can be a big problem even for
top-of-the-line military hardware
flameouts can also be caused by an
equipment failure on the plane itself
typically in the fuel pump or other
engine components regardless of the
cause the effects are typically the same
across the board when a flame out occurs
the pilots first reaction is to shut off
the fuel being pumped to the misbehaving
turbine quickly and quietly shutting it
down at which point the pilot will
calmly inform the passengers of the
emergency and descend to a lower
altitude as the crew figures out what
exactly went wrong the plane will often
have to make an emergency landing but
the descent isn't exactly going to be a
wild ride the Federal Aviation
Administration requires commercial
planes to be able to fly and land safely
with only one engine operational the
stricken aircraft will usually be
rerouted to the nearest airport and
emergency responders will be standing by
but this is mainly a precaution rather
than a necessity
engine failure is no laughing matter but
neither is it a guaranteed catastrophe
now have you ever experienced an
emergency landing let me know about it
in the comments it's so easy to land a
plane on one engine that many autopilot
systems can manage it without assistance
from the humans in the cockpit sleeping
passengers or anyone really engrossed in
the cat videos on their phone may not
even know there was an emergency until
they're on the ground this kind of total
failure is extremely unlikely but there
have been isolated incidents of that
very thing happening to aircraft in
flight for example Air Canada flight 143
suffered a double engine flameout in
1983 a series of problems including
technical issues miscommunication
maintenance errors and faulty metric
conversions led to the plane leaving the
tarmac without enough fuel to reach
their destination predictably this led
to further problems while passing over
the small town of Red Lake Ontario an
alarm sounded in the cockpit
at first they thought it was a problem
with the fuel pumps but within seconds
of rerouting to Winnipeg the left engine
went dark the right soon followed oh boy
so this is the part where flight 143
dropped like an aluminum rock right well
no the plane's engines may push it
forward but they aren't the part that
keeps it in the air that would be the
wings which provide lift when air passes
under them losing its engines cost
flight 143 the ability to climb or
accelerate but it could still glide
running out of fuel also caused the 767
to lose all power disabling not only the
lights and radio but the controls and
instrument panel as well fortunately
like most modern airliners the plane was
equipped with what's known as a ram air
turbine or r8e
these are small wind turbines often
concealed behind a panel in the fuselage
that can be extended in the event of a
complete power loss this device allowed
the pilots of air canada flight 143 to
safely navigate to and land in an
airfield turn racetrack outside the town
of Gimli Manitoba flight 143 did end up
partially losing power again during the
final approach this time it was due to
the aircraft's reduced velocity
preventing the r8e from spinning at full
speed despite these challenges the plane
was able to set down with only minor
damage after undergoing repairs it was
able to continue flying until its
retirement in 2008 25 years after the
emergency landing the plane which was
officially registered under the name CGA
un earned a new moniker after the
incident the Gimli glider Oh Canada now
you might have noticed the conga line of
problems that led to flight 143 awkward
landing this near disaster was a result
of an unlikely sequence of events giving
you an idea of how many different things
need to go wrong before a complete
engine failure can occur tighter
regulations and improved maintenance
procedures have mitigated the risks
substantially although there's still the
occasional fluke for example the famous
miracle
on the Hudson in January 2009 occurred
after an airbus a320 collided with a
flock of geese shortly after taking off
from New York City's LaGuardia Airport
the accident resulted in the loss of
both engines and forced the pilot
Chesley Sully Sullenberger to make a
risky water landing in the nearby Hudson
River
despite the below zero temperatures and
the extreme difficulty of the landing
all 155 passengers and crew were
evacuated onto boats and carried to
safety while many people had to be
treated for hypothermia and there were
several injuries only five of them were
considered severe multiple engine
failures have the potential to become
very dangerous but the good news is that
they're extremely rare now that covers
planes but what would happen if a
helicopter lost its engines in flight as
it turns out helicopters have an even
easier time landing without power than
planes do a helicopters rotors act like
a combination propeller and wing
providing both lift and forward momentum
while this might seem like bad news at
first helicopters have a saving grace in
what's known as auto rotation if the
engine's revolution per minute ever
drops below a predetermined threshold a
mechanism will be tripped disconnecting
the main rotor from the engine this
allows it to continue spinning
independently on its own momentum buying
the pilot time to regain control of
their aircraft if left uncontrolled the
helicopter would tumble out of the sky
very much dropping like the
before-mentioned aluminum rock
fortunately this rarely happens as
helicopter pilots are trained to pitch
the aircraft slightly down allowing them
to maintain control throughout its
descent the correct angle will vary
depending on the model of helicopter but
that information is available in the
helicopters operation manual you've got
time to open a book
accounting for wind speed and other
variables can be challenging at first
however autorotation landings are
considered to be one of the most
straightforward helicopter procedures
and all helicopter pilots have to
complete one to get their license no
matter how you fly I wouldn't worry too
much about a complete engine failure
since they're exceptionally rare and
surprisingly easy to recover from plus
you get to walk away with a great story
to share hey if you learn something new
today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life
[Music]